[Music] good day I'm Norman Wildberger today
we're going to talk about the difference between
absolute and relative measurement particularly
in Geometry we have a chance to go back to some
of the thinking of the ancient Greeks but also
to Forefront of moving ahead with geometry today
okay so the Notions of absolute measurements
and relative measurements are in fact very
familiar to us from everyday life and this is a
well-known Concept in everyday life an absolute
measurement is something like fred is 190 cm tall
involves a particular number and a certain amount
of units measuring some particular quantity and
there's only one object involved this case Fred
we're just measuring Fred in an absolute sense
or the book weighs 1 kilog we're just talking
about one book and making a measurement about
its weight or light takes 8 minutes to get from
the Sun to the Earth that's involving two
objects but we're really only measuring one
quantity now a relative measurement is where
we have two kinds of similar things and we're
comparing them but we're not necessarily invoking
any units so for example Fred is twice as tall
as Hilda this is independent of of whether
we're measuring in centimeters or in inches
feet meters or some other system just the fact
that Fred is twice as tall as Hilda a relative
measurement comparing Fred with Hilda or the
book weighs onethird of the case this statement
doesn't tell us how much the book in the case
weighs just tells us the relationship between
the two and an octave represents a frequency
ratio of 2: one you go from La La that's an OCT
I and the pythagoreans realize that's related
to the ratio of 2:1 frequencies so absolute
measurements typically involve units we have some
choice of measuring yard stick for whatever we're
measuring whether it be length or weight or
something else while relative measurements are
generally pure ratios or proportions they're
in some sense unitless quantities because the
units whatever we're using sort of cancel out
so this twice here is a unitless thing the 1/3
is unitless the two to one is unitless so these
are very familiar kind of distinctions between
different ways of thinking about measuring
in our Ordinary World but they have a lot
of applications to mathematics too and that's
what we're going to be interested in today the
ancient Greeks in particular the pythagoreans held
proportions in high regard for them the world was
governed by ratios perhaps more than by numbers
it was the ratios of things that were often the
most interesting things for them in Geometry
a similar kind of approach applied the great
mathematician UD doxis and then a little while
later euklid laid out a theory of proportions
and this was written up in book five of The
Elements which is one of the most important
and historically influential books of the elements
so the attitude to the Greek measurement was very
different from ours today something I've talked
about at various times and it's good to remind
you that they thought in terms of segments in the
plane but they did not think in terms of measuring
lengths they did not think about having a ruler
and applying a ruler to such situations to measure
things so for example these days if we were
interested in the relationship between the
segments A and B we would be inclined to take a
ruler and we would measure this one say it's 8 cm
and we would measure this one and it's 16 cm and
so we would say aha this one is twice as long as
this one but that's not the way the ancient Greeks
worked uclid had a serious reservation about using
length because he was aware that when you work
with links you have to deal with irrational
quantities and in fact the ancient Greeks didn't
have a very good numerical system anyway so how
did they think about the relationship between
these things well uid thought in terms of motions
in terms of comparing this segment with this
segment by moving this segment and comparing it
now you may not actually have to move the segment
one way of doing that sort of indirectly would be
to take a other piece say this thing here and we
could record the segment a on it with these two
strokes okay then we could go up here and sort of
if we do careful we can see that aha this segment
B is in fact two copies of the segment a notice
that we don't really need a ruler to do that we
just need a straight edge which has the capability
of being marked so we can see with this method of
using translations of a marked straight edge
that the ratio of a to B the proportion is 1:
2 now how about this one here it's a little bit
more involved this uh segment C and the segment
D if we do the same for it let's say there's our
segment C we do the same thing to D over here let
me Mark that here so there's our our segment
C translated there but we see that there's
something else left over which is not going to be
a multiple of C so it's not the case here that c
is a multiple of D so what did the Greeks do
in that situation well they thought a little
bit more deeply about things and they said well
let's have a look at this segment D here there's
C in there then we have this leftover piece let's
have a look at the left over piece let's say which
is uh here and let's compare it to C in fact they
would have gone all right so if we look at that
leftover piece so that's uh goes in there once
and goes in there twice and goes in there three
times okay let's say it goes in four times so this
little segment here is occurring four times times
here okay but that means that since this was the
same as this in terms of this segment this smaller
segment here we now see that c is four times
that smaller segment while D would be a total
of five times that smaller segment because we had
C fitting there so C to D would be in the ratio
of 4 to 5 they would have been able to determine
that by finding this smaller segment which was
commensurable with both segments in other words
such that both segments were a multiple of that
smaller one so this is a very attractive Theory
but the Greeks eventually realized that you had
to go further than this that it was necessary
sometimes to compare segments which were not
commensurable for example the side and the
diagonal of a square and they particularly
UD doxis developed a more sophisticated sort
of approach to proportions which allowed one
to work with more General lengths even if they
are even if they were forming an incommensurable
pair so what ended up being crucial is that
you can be able to say that if you have say
e and f EF those two segments and g h those
two segments what does it mean to say that
the proportion between e to F was the same as
the proportion G to H one way to say it would
be to actually evaluate this as a proportion
of integers like 5 to 3 and then evaluate this
one and show that's the same proportion 5 to
3 but if these were incommensurable then you
wouldn't be able to express the proportion as
a proportion of integers and so UD doxis had to
find some more indirect way of being able to
assert that the proportion between these two
was equal to the proportion between those two
and it was a very clever and uh lovely way of
proceeding which I'm not going to tell you about
but I have talked about that in some other videos
but nevertheless it gives you an idea that
the ancient Greeks had a a strong sense of
the importance of thinking about proportions
and moreover they were a little bit flexible
that those proportions didn't have to be integer
proportions but they were able to do this without
actually invoking a theory of irrational numbers
they knew that there were irrationalities floating
around here but they didn't actually talk about
irrational numbers as such because we have gone
such a long ways from uclid and the fact that
ukl is no longer studied in schools it means
that our understanding of the Greek point point
of view is uh sadly diminished in the 16th and
17th centuries for the European mathematicians
the situation was quite different for them the
Greek translations that had come to them from
Arabic translations were only a few centuries
old sense of having been around only relatively
recently and there was a lot of admiration and
reverence in fact for the Greek way of thinking
so uet's theory of proportions which includes
UD doxis incommensurability theory was
considered more solid than irrational
numbers geometry was considered the Bedrock
of mathematics while arithmetic was some kind
of much more dubious uh kind of creation whose
whose real structure was not really clarified
people were following the ancient Greeks
and thinking that the basis of arithmetic
was really geometry if you wanted to establish
arithmetical results you had to do it through
geometry all right so the situation is uh is
quite different from what it is today and so
there's a lot of possibility for people to get
confused and a lot of confusion still today
remarkably is related to this diagram which in
fact befuddled the ancient Greeks the pythagoreans
remember struggled mightly with the fact that
they realized that if you take a unit square
and you look at its diagonal then that diagonal
is incommensurable with the side if you ask the
question what is the length of that side or as the
Greeks would have done what is the proportion of
this diagonal to this side you cannot express that
in terms of an integer proportion that was a great
shock to the ancient Greeks it was also part of
the reason why uclid carefully avoided a theory
of length in the elements uid goes out of his
way to not introduce explicit measurements to
not introduce absolute measurements and probably
the main reason is exactly because of this diagram
because of the difficulty in saying precisely what
the word length means and in particular defining
the length of this thing here now some students
will be so used to equating this diagonal with
its length that it's hard for them to accept
that there's a distinction the diagonal itself
is a line segment which exists independent of any
measurement of it the length of that line segment
is just one possible thing that you might want
to measure of that line segment there might be
lots of questions you can ask about the line
segment and length would be one of them the
question does the line segment have a length
has an answer no you cannot Define the length
of that line segment not at least not in the
traditional way in terms of assigning to it a
number so for most of History geometry was more
solid than arithmetic and curiously in the last
few centuries the situation has been very much
reversed so that these days we almost all think
of geometry as being built up from algebra
which is quite reasonable in fact because it
allows us to avoid some very serious problematic
issues that were in uclid but were perhaps not so
visible okay but it does open up a whole can
of worms that if we don't get our arithmetic
very clearly understood then we're going to
have problems understanding geometry as well
very much the current situation so today there
is a a view that segments are essentially the
same as their lengths that these two Notions are
somehow intimately connected and if you have one
then you have the other okay what I'm trying
to get you to realize is that the segments
and their lengths are quite different things in
particular if there are any geogebra developers
watching please abandon the labeling of segments
by their lengths when you construct a segment in
geogebra it is not necessary to immediately see
its length that's a secondary thing that should
not be put sort of first and foremost when you're
talking about a length and in fact if you're going
to allow people to see lengths you probably should
also allow them to see quadrant is too all right
so this distinction between absolute and relative
measurements that we have in ordinary life that
we're very much aware of is reflected in a similar
distinction in mathematics the distinction between
an absolute and a relative measurement turns out
to be very very important in mathematics in a
number of different ways so our first example goes
right back to the beginnings of this series to
our first few videos where we introduced natural
numbers and the arithmetic with natural numbers
and then shortly afterwards we introduced integers
natural numbers are very good examples of absolute
kind of measurement when we're counting the number
of objects 1 2 3 4 5 we're making an absolute
measurement while integers are in fact relative
measurements or at least the way we Define them
they were I remind you that when we introduce
natural numbers we did it in a reasonably naive
way we said that we had the number one which was
just a stroke on the page and then the number two
and then the number three and the number four
and so on and a little while later we introduce
the Hindu Arabic numeral system for those numbers
when we talked about integers we have to Define
what an integer is before we can do arithmetic
with them and you may remember that we defined
integers in terms of natural numbers but in terms
of the relations between two natural numbers so
we considered something like the expression 4
L 1 which equals 5 L 2 which equals 9 L 6 so we
introduce this expression with this new kind of
symbol and we had a rule that told us when one
such expression equal another such expression the
rule was that k l l is equal to m l n precisely
when k + n = l + m if all these four are natural
numbers then this is something that we can check
because it only involves natural numbers and
addition with them so this is our notion of
equality so that 4 + 2 is the same as 1 + 5 so
this expression and this expression are equal
and then we thought of this thing as actually
the integer minus 3 so an integer was initially
defined as a relative notion between two natural
numbers and this is reflected in the number line
approach to numbers there is the familiar number
line and there now is the point which we call
minus three but another way of thinking about
minus three which is often involved in primary
school is to think about minus 3 as being a move
to the left by exactly three so in other words
this this sort of arrow that goes from 4 to one is
another way of thinking about what minus 3 means
in fact there's a kind of a duality involved in
the number line here possible source of confusion
to a clever student because one point we're saying
that the number three is that point and then on
other occasions we're thinking about the number
three as being this motion to the left by three
or if you like this directed line segment there
really kind of two different minus 3s floating
around here and we could get at that by giving
them slightly different labels so we could call
this point the point minus 3 with a square bracket
around it in fact that coincides with our notion
of the idea of an aine one point and we could
think about this directed line segment from 4
to one as being round brackets with minus
3 in it and think of it as being a vector
so the distinction between a point and a vector
is occurring here in our interpretation of What
minus 3 means we have two different views closely
connected but subtly different so another example
of the difference between absolute and relative
measurements has to do with these apine points
that we've been talking about which are in some
sense absolute while of course responding Vector
Notions are relative so let me describe that here
here's the apine plane which we're calling A2 with
the familiar points like that is the point 21
call it capital A there's the point B which is
13 here's the point C which is -1 0 and the point
D which is -22 so here the points themselves are
actual exact objects they are given by these
Expressions here we're thinking of them as sort
of absolute kinds of things but Associated to
these apine points we can also talk about the
relationship between two of them or the directed
line segment between two of them which we like to
call a vector so this vector v which goes from B
to a we can write it like that with the arrow and
we can express it as the vector v which is 1 minus
2 in round brackets expressing the fact that to
go from here to here we have to go one over in
the X Direction and down to in the y direction
now this Vector is a relative notion between b
and a it's not so much an absolute notion it's a
relative thing it's comparing b and a in some way
over here D and C are related by the same kind of
relation as b and a are so this Vector here is
also some kind of relative measurement of D and
C it's telling us something about the relative
positions of D and C but not absolutely where
they are so with this Vector idea we can say that
the relationship between b and a positionally is
the same as the relationship between D and C even
though the positions of them are quite different
they're both expressed by this vector v which is
1 - 2 so we can write V equals both ba and D C so
we have two actually different kinds of sort of
objects floating around here we have points given
by square brackets and we have these vectors given
by round brackets and they are in fact different
things and it's useful to think about them having
sort of a separate existence even though they come
from the same diagram so we can think about having
a vector plane a new new kind of plane which we
going to call V2 which is the vector plane which
consists of just the vectors themselves and not
the points so that the objects over here are
only vectors and they're always emanating from
the origin so the vector 1 - 2 over here is this
Vector right here going to the point the ordinary
Point 1 - 2 but we now can think about this Point
as not being a point but actually as being that
Vector so in this situation we would only use
round brackets and we would think about these
round brackets as representing vectors emanating
from the origin so arithmetically it seems as if
they're looking quite the same but in fact they
have quite different properties this apine plane
and the vector plane in the alphine plane there's
really nothing special about the origin just Happ
happens to have special coordinates but it's
not really a special point but over here the
zero Vector has very much a distinguished role so
in the vector plane there really is a an important
sort of center right there while in the aine
plane it's rather more translation invariant
difference between an absolute kind of point of
view and a relative point of view in some way now
good courses in Geometry or linear algebra will
distinguish between points and vectors and it's
very useful for students to um make sure that
they can keep these two Notions separate even
though they're very closely connected vectors have
an arithmetical structure that apine points don't
have namely they can be multiplied by scalar
and they can be added so if we're working in
this Vector plane V2 whose objects are all
vectors so here for example is the vector
v which is the vector 21 here's the vector W
which is min -11 then what we can do is we can
add those two vectors we can add the vectors
arithmetically just by adding the components
if we add 2 1 and minus one 1 we get one and two
we get this Vector here which we can call V plus
W and geometrically this is the diagonal of a
parallelogram that we form by taking the vectors
V and W and creating the parallelogram another
thing we can do is we can multiply for example
we could take this Vector W which is minus one1
we can multiplied by three that would give us the
vector minus 33 which is up here just three times
as long in the same direction so once we have
this addition and scalar multiplication it's not
too hard to Define subtraction as well we we get
a very rich kind of arithmetic which is in some
sense some kind of generalization of integer or
rational number arithmetic so the properties of
such an arithmetic vectors very useful and it's
encoded in the more abstract definition of of a
vector space which plays a key role in in linear
algebra so this arithmetical structure in this
relative story of vector which are ultimately
defined in terms of relative positions of points
which is not shared by the points themselves
doesn't really make sense to talk about the
sum of two points in the plane or you know
how to multiply a point by three but multiplying
vector by three makes sense adding vectors does
make sense so we saw in our last video that if
we're working in the apine plane with an idea
of trying to get length introduced that this
notion of length of a line segment really only
applies to very particular line segments which
are in certain privileged directions a typical
line segment does not have a length and I know
this is disconcerting for for many of you who
are sort of used to all line segments having
length but with this notion of vectors and uh
this idea of relative measurement we can get some
kind of partial replace M for this difficulty so
we cannot generally measure lengths along the
line Y = X for example in our aine plane this
familiar line here has the property that if we
take the point the origin 0 0 and the point one1
it does not make sense to talk about the length
of that segment because that goes back to that
Pythagorean conundrum that we've talked about
many times so the length of OA is undefined
but but along this line we can have a notion of
relative lengths or more precisely relative sign
lengths although we are not able to absolutely
measure lengths we are able to compare signed
lengths here and here interesting situation with
the absolute object doesn't exist but relative
notion does exist so let me explain that let's
have a look at this situation here where we have
the point O the point a and the point B which is
N9 quars n quarters so it also lies on this line
if we think in terms of vectors if we think
of the vector o a and the vector a they are
in the same direction and so in this case one of
them is a multiple of the other if we take this
Vector here and we ask what's the relationship
between this Vector so this Vector would would
be the vector uh 54 5 quar well this Vector would
be the vector 1 one with round brackets right and
then this is the vector 1 one and this is
the vector 5 quarters 5 quarters well then
this Vector is just 5 quarters that one it's a
multiple of this one or in proportion notation
the proportion between the vector o a and the
vector AB is 4 to 5 it's four to five so we
are able to talk about the relative sign lengths
along this line here in fact we're allowed to do
that along any line so we given any line it makes
sense to talk about relative signed lengths along
that line even though we're not able to talk
about absolute lengths along a general line
that's an very interesting situation that uh
goes some way to alleviating this problem okay
that we have to move to a relative thinking
about measurement if we're going to take some
Subspace of our apine space so it turns out
that this situation does generalize to areas
and volumes more precisely to signed areas
and sign volumes but to really Express that
in a good way we have to kind of think about
what two-dimensional analoges of vectors are
or what three-dimensional analoges of vectors
are this is a very subtle uh issue that goes
back to a a brilliant but largely unrecognized
German school teacher I'm going to be talking
about grassman's work in videos to come but to
give a an orientation uh towards that I think
it's going to be useful for me to provide now a
a little bit of a discussion about how to think
about geometry generally okay we've been talking
about various kinds of spaces there's apine spaces
and Vector spaces and earlier I was talking about
projective spaces I think it's kind of important
that I give you kind of an overall Vista of the
kinds of spaces that are sort of fundamental for
geometry modern geometry in particular and uh
so that that'll be a good foundation for for
going further in our understanding of of various
constructions that we can do in higher dimensional
spaces so I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman wildberger thanks for [Music] listening